[music]
>> Pushkin
>> This guy calls me like 7:00 in the
morning.
I'm like, "Tommy, what's up?"
>> In 2001, the head of Sony Music, Tommy
Mottola, called the rap producer Irv
Gotti.
At the time, Gotti worked with Jay-Z, Ja
Rule, Ashanti, DMX. In the hip-hop world
of the early odds, he was at the top of
his game.
>> He's like, "Yo, I need you to make a
record."
And I said, "What?" He said, "Make a
record with J. Lo and put Ja on it and
make it a duet." And I said, "Yo,
I need total creative autonomy. I'm
doing whatever the [__] I want." Tommy
was like, "You could do whatever the
[__] you want, as long as it's a duet
with Ja Rule and J. Lo."
>> Mottola wanted Gotti to do a remix of
I'm Real, a single off J. Lo's second
album. The first time around, it had
been a generic ballad. Mottola thought
it could be reinvigorated.
Gotti went to work and started to make a
demo with Ja Rule and Ashanti.
>> I said, "Yo, I got the record. It's I'm
Real." Him and his wife, Taraya, come to
the crack house, my studio in SoHo.
And it's funny cuz the freight elevator
used to always go out.
So, him and Taraya walked up six flights
of stairs.
He gets upstairs, he said, "This [__]
record better be [__] good."
So, I play
I I play it real strong, him and his
wife go crazy.
They're like, "Oh my god." It was a one
listen. They listened and they was like,
"It's the biggest record."
So, he puts me on a private jet.
I fly to LA, record the record with J.
Lo. Next thing you know, the record
comes out, it's all over the radio. I'm
talking about
maybe a couple days after we recorded
it, it's all over the radio.
>> I'm real,
what you say
>> [music]
>> A few months later, Gotti made another
remix from J-Lo's album,
Ain't It Funny.
The same thing happened.
>> You don't even understand. Those records
was colossal, not just in the States, on
the planet Earth. I don't give a [__] if
you went to Germany, Australia, Africa.
That [__] was in heavy rotation. Look,
those was the two biggest records. And
for me to do I'm Real and then said,
"Fuck it." and did Ain't It Funny. Uh it
was like uh
at that point in my life, I
I was like on top of the world. It was a
feeling of
invincibility. It was a feeling of I
could do whatever the [__] I want.
To portray who I was at that moment,
that's that's who I was.
I'm from the hood. I'm making all of
this money.
I'm producing records for everybody. All
of them are working and going number
one. And money's raining from the sky. I
could do no wrong.
>> It was at this point that Irv Gotti made
a mistake.
My name is Malcolm Gladwell.
>> [music]
>> You're listening to Revisionist History,
my podcast about things overlooked and
misunderstood.
This is the third episode in our [music]
mini series inspired by Michael Linton
and Josh Steiner's book, From Mistakes
to Meaning.
Where the authors sit [music] down with
a wide range of people and try to make
sense of their biggest screw-ups.
One of their interviews [music]
was with Irv Gotti,
just before Gotti had a stroke and died
at the age of 54.
I listened to the interview and I found
[music] his story so moving
that I asked Steiner and Linton if I
could include it in this series.
Because in his story, [music] I think,
is a really important lesson.
Not the person who makes the mistake,
but about the people around the person
who makes the mistake.
The witnesses.
>> Man, I grew up Oh, man, I grew up Let me
Let me describe how it was. I'm the
youngest of eight kids.
>> This is Gotti talking to Linton and
Steiner about his childhood and growing
up in Queens.
>> We have no money.
We live in a home. I I sleep in the
attic.
You ever slept in the attic of a house?
In the summertime, there's no refuge.
It's a hundred and change. You You wake
up every every day you wake up in a
puddle of sweat.
Like I had That was my life. That's
It was a lot of love. My family, the
most loving family, but we had nothing.
So, when you talk about
the city, you tell me I'm not I don't
give a [__] yo.
I'm getting money. Oh, I'm going to I'm
going to get it.
I'mma work my ass off and get it. I
don't give a [__] what comes from it.
>> He was blunt, reckless, ambitious, and
hugely talented. His rise in the music
world was swift.
It was no accident that Motola called
Gotti to work with Jennifer Lopez, then
well on her way to becoming one of the
biggest celebrities in America.
And when the two of them met at Gotti's
recording studio, Gotti from Queens,
J.Lo from the Bronx, they clicked.
Just so you know what to expect, we're
giving you the unfiltered Gotti.
>> So, I had like 30 hood [music] [__]
in the studio, and in walks
J.Lo, and she was straight Jenny from
the block. She had [music] on some
sweatpants and a tank top. And if I tell
you she got in that studio and she had
every one of my guys fall in love with
her.
She worked and talked to everybody and I
was just like, "Yo, she's so dope."
You know what I'm saying? Cuz she could
have been on some I'm a big star bougie
[__] but she was the total opposite.
The The biggest sex symbol, biggest
superstar
got on some sweatpants. I asked him
she's looking [__] phenomenal. She
worked She literally worked the whole
room. Like when she left, every guy was
like, "Yo, she's dope. I think she liked
me." I'm like, "Yo, dog, she's She
worked us, yo. She She worked the
[__] room." But I thought it was so
dope of her.
And me and her, specifically,
yo, we hit it off. Benny Medina, her
manager,
Benny Medina
was like, "Irv, you're going to be like
the Quincy Jones to her Michael
Jackson."
He was like, "We're not doing nothing
musically unless you're involved."
>> A year later, Elle magazine decided to
do a cover story on Jennifer Lopez. It
was for their sex and body issue. June
2002, headline big letters, J. Lo on
fashion, that song, and Puffy.
Puffy referred to Puffy Combs, the
infamous rap impresario who she'd just
broken up with. And that song referred
to Ain't It Funny because Gotti's
reinterpretation of the song turned it
into the story of someone coming out of
a very problematic relationship.
The writer asks her, "Is that song about
Puffy?" She says, "No, it's not."
Then the reporter calls Gotti. "J. Lo
says Ain't It Funny isn't about Puffy.
What do you say?
And Gotti says, "Oh, it's absolutely
about Puffy.
And J-Lo knows it."
Here's the exact quote from the Elle
magazine article, which by the way, is
nearly impossible to find now. My
producer had to get someone at the New
York Public Library to unearth the issue
from an off-site storage unit.
"I ain't going to lie. We was thinking
of effing with Puffy cuz that's what the
world wants to hear."
And Gotti tells the reporter a story
about running into Puffy before Ain't It
Funny came out and playing him the demo.
He says,
"You know the Four Seasons on Doheny in
LA? I pull up and Puffy's out there with
his security and I say, 'Puff, come
listen to the new record I did with your
old bitch.'
So, boom, he gets in the car. So, I'm
blasting the record and when it gets to
the second verse, he jumps out of the
car screaming, 'Gotti, you bastard!'"
This is the second verse. Listen.
>> [music]
[music]
>> He calls J-Lo's ex-boyfriend into his
car and says,
"Come listen to the new record I just
did with your old bitch."
In a very public way, Gotti was
essentially saying Jennifer Lopez wasn't
being honest. He called her credibility
into question.
>> When I read it in Elle magazine,
J-Lo
quote,
"Those records are not about Puff
Daddy." End quote. It was
It's the worst mistake
I've ever made in my life because I say
that to say cuz J-Lo, Benny Medina,
they was friends. They loved me.
They loved me. Like I was a writer for
them and
I would do things for them that probably
no one else could do and I would get
done
for them and
she was my friend.
Like why the [__] would I say that?
Why the [__] would I say that?
>> But Ja Rule didn't stop there. He kept
going.
>> Right?
So
I went on to say other damaging things
like how would she know? She didn't
write the records. We made the records
and wrote the records. She just did what
we said.
So she don't know who the [__] we was
talking about.
And yeah, we was talking about Diddy.
And uh
then I said some more damaging [__] I
was like guys like me, we didn't listen
to J- We don't listen to J. Lo's music.
I made guys like me listen to J. Lo's
music. I said before then we just
hit the mute button and look at that
ass.
Yeah.
>> Ja Rule reflected on this with Michael
Linton and Josh Steiner when they spoke.
>> Wow.
>> And you could pull all this up in the L
magazine. It's It's It's It's there.
>> Those are vivid quotes.
>> [laughter]
>> Those are Those are like supreme [__]
quotes
that wasn't warranted and when I look
back I was like, what did you do to your
friend?
>> Yeah.
So
>> Needless to say
>> Needless to say it ruined my my
relationship
with J. Lo.
I apologized. I sent her candy and
flowers and
apologized a million times and I you
know, I was high. That's no excuse.
You know what I'm saying? I apologized.
I apologized and she accepted my apology
but it it forever damaged our
relationship.
>> Right.
>> You know, superstars like J-Lo, they
have a small circle of people who they
could trust and
I think I was in there for a second.
>> Yeah.
>> And I totally ruined it.
>> Right.
>> So, I'm an [__]
>> Well, you were in that moment.
>> I'm totally in the wrong and I'm a
complete
>> [music]
>> idiot.
Make sure you say that that I said that
I'm a complete idiot. She didn't warrant
that. She didn't warrant nothing that I
said.
She was my friend.
And why would I do that with the biggest
star and most beautifulest person
Why would I do that with J-Lo?
>> [music]
>> One of the themes we tried to explore in
the series is that mistakes have roots.
They aren't random events. They come
from somewhere.
They arise out of a context, but the
context often isn't obvious. Not to
those around the mistake maker and often
not even to the mistake maker
themselves.
In Gotti's case the context was a
telephone call he'd been on just before
the reporter called.
It was with a prominent music industry
executive. Gotti asked that the man's
name not be used. So, we're going to
bleep out every mention of his name.
All you need to know is that the
executive is white and Gotti was black.
The two of them had an argument. One of
Gotti's artists had played a part in a
hit song and was in the music video, but
had been left out of the radio version.
And Gotti was unhappy about it.
>> So,
I was like, "Yo, you're killing my
artist.
You got him on the video, but on radio
he's not there. It's sending like mixed
signals.
why you hurting me.
>> Their argument got heated. The executive
said it wasn't his fault. The decision
was someone else's at his label.
A black man.
>> He was like I told that fat [__]
not to not to put this out.
But when he said the N-word, oh, that's
when I I went crazy.
>> Wow.
>> I said, "What the [__] you say?"
I said, "You just called Corey Rooney a
nigger."
I said, "When this when this [__] see
you, I'm going to [__] you up."
I said, "How about that?"
And he's like, "Irv and then" and we
arguing.
>> Yeah.
>> But he said he he used the N-word on
some racist [__] He said, "I told that
fat [__] not to put the record out or
put him on it."
>> Yeah.
>> But when he said [__] I went
that's that's that's
the anger.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm not a volatile person. I'm not a
pop off. I I I would describe myself as
a cool guy, level-headed.
But there's something about
when a white person like
uses the word [__] to me
>> Mhm.
>> Oh, I'm ready to kill.
Because it's like
I you start thinking of all of the
[__] up [__] that black people been
through and you got the audacity to say
[__] in front of me?
Oh, I'mma show you a [__] now. You
know what I'm saying? Like I used to
always say like when people would ask
me, "How How would you be able How did
you How would you think you would be
able to operate in those times of
racism?"
And I always answer I would die.
You know what I'm saying? Cuz
>> Yeah.
>> I couldn't take the racism that would
have been bestowed upon me.
I would have killed me a couple white
people and they would have hung me and
killed me and my life would be over.
I couldn't take them doing something to
my mother or you know, hanging my father
and I'm living life. Nah, you going to
have to kill me, too.
So,
these are the thoughts that's in my
mind.
>> Yeah. Have you experienced that before
where you had white people say things
which you thought
>> Now, a lot of my white friends would
say, "Yo, that's my nigger." But, I'm
not mad at that.
>> Yeah.
>> Use the When they say, "That's my
nigger." it's n i g g a.
He said, "Yo, I told that fat [__]
that's n i g g e r. It's a big, big
difference."
Like, I couldn't I couldn't believe that
he just used the m-word
to me.
That's what made me so volatile.
And it was so weird. It was like as soon
as I hung up with the phone, rang
without.
It wasn't like a 5-minute It wasn't even
like a 5-minute cool-off period. No.
Hung up, man. Yo, this is L Magazine.
Yeah, what the [__] y'all want?
>> [laughter]
>> It's not like saying hello. A little
different.
>> [laughter]
>> Can I ask So, what do you think it was
that made you You think you were just
going to lash out at anybody who showed
up in that moment?
>> Uh and yeah, within that 5 minutes,
yeah. They was going to get the exact
same vibe. What the [__] you want?
>> Yeah.
>> It just so happened it was L Magazine,
not one of my boys.
Well, so
I said, "What the [__] you want?"
And he was like, "Oh, uh uh
I see uh
Like, as soon as he heard that response,
he he immediately cut to the chase. He
said, "Oh, oh, I'll just get right to
it.
Uh, you know,
J. Lo said
that the records I'm really not funny
are not about Puff Daddy, her
ex-boyfriend.
And I was like, "What? That [__] is
lying."
>> This was Irv Gotti's mistake. It changed
his life.
There was a version of the next 20 years
where he could have been a creative
partner with one of the biggest stars in
the world. He had ideas for movies,
collaborations. J. Lo was a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
That's why this was a mistake. It had
consequences.
But there was a point in Gotti's
interview with Steiner and Linton that I
couldn't get out of my mind.
Listen.
>> How quickly did you realize that you'd
made a mistake?
>> I didn't realize quickly.
I was so angry and mad when I got off
the phone with L magazine.
I thought nothing of it.
It hit me when they sent me like the
transcripts of
what they was going to print.
>> How long after that was that?
>> Uh,
couple uh week or so, I would say.
>> All right.
And when you got that, did you realize
it right away?
>> Yeah, I was like, "Don't print that."
And they was like, "It's too
But they was like, "It's too late."
>> Yeah.
>> They loved it. They loved it.
And they said it was too late.
And I was trying to get them not to
print it, but they wasn't
>> [music]
>> They was like, "Hey, buddy, you said
it."
>> Yeah.
>> Did you get any try to Did you get any
help to try to get them not to do it, or
did you just let it go?
>> I don't know. I let it go.
I gave it my effort, but after my
effort, I I just let it go.
>> He realized he'd made a mistake. That in
his anger at one person he had said
something he didn't mean to another.
And when he tried to prevent his mistake
from having consequences, from turning
into a serious mistake, he was told,
"Hey, buddy, you said it. It's too
late."
After Linton and Steiner's book came
out, I interviewed them on stage at the
92nd Street Y in New York, and I brought
up their chapter on Gaudi.
So,
who's the villain of the story?
>> Not every story has to have a villain.
>> No, but tell me who the villain of the
story is.
>> So, don't Michael, don't fall for this.
Like, this is okay. This is like This is
why he's so good. But, don't fall for
his trap. Like, okay. You can say not
every story
>> got to keep the conversation going. I
would argue it was the executive who
used the N-word.
>> Josh, who's the villain of the story?
Here's what I think. That guy acted
terribly. There is no villain in the
story. And I think
an important piece of what we tried to
describe is that
there isn't always a villain. Um, there
isn't always some outside danger. There
isn't always some consequence that has
been derived from a villain. That these
things are deep-rooted in ourselves. And
we're not villainous. And so, that
aspect of our personality doesn't make
us bad. This isn't a morality test. This
is an opportunity to explore oneself and
come to a terms and acceptance of the
fact that we're flawed. And the way to
get hopefully healthier and better is to
talk about it.
>> Who do you think the villain is?
>> Emmanuel has a very close relationship
to the biggest rock star in the world.
A relationship that has resulted in
extraordinary commercial success.
>> Mhm.
>> Is called by a reporter and is asked a
question about that relationship. And in
the course of answering that question,
the man says, "Oh, she's a liar."
>> Mhm.
>> Who's the villain in the story?
>> You think it's her?
No?
>> It's the reporter.
>> But, the reporter doesn't
>> No, no, no, no. This This a crucial
crucial point, Michael. And I think this
is
because it's about when mistakes are
made.
>> Mhm.
>> Um and they are as deeply rooted as you
suggest they are. They're not What
you're What the whole argument of the
book is a mistake can come out in the
spur of the moment, but it it's not
something that's coming out in the spur
of the moment. It's something that has
roots.
>> Right.
>> And what does that require of those who
observe and are part of the process in
which the mistake is played out? It It
requires some degree of
um grace and forgiveness and
understanding.
>> Yep.
>> Right?
So, the reporter
hears some Irv got Irv Gotti say
something that is completely
out of
place.
Right? It makes The reason it The reason
that story So, that story you what
what you didn't What is an important
detail is here is it goes It's all
across the country. It's like it's huge.
That's why it blows up so much. Everyone
seizes on this. Her long-time
collaborator called J. Lo a liar, right?
If you are the reporter in that instance
and someone says something they
shouldn't say, your obligation is to
say, "Wait, why did you say that?" And
if they can't give you a satisfactory
answer, your obligation is not to use
it. I'm sorry, it's not to use it.
You're not
You You shouldn't You can't make someone
The reporter turn that from a nothing
into a destruction of someone's career
because they had not this not the
slightest concern for his well-being or
his reputation. And they If they had an
ounce of self-understanding or of
general understanding, they would have
understood that he didn't mean to say
that.
They should at the very least have said,
"Did you mean to say that?"
Right? That's your responsibility, and
the The reporter failed in that
fundamental Why do people hate the
press? Because
because in an interview like this where
we could talk for 3 hours and you say
one thing out of place cuz you have to
be irritated about something else and a
reporter runs with that one thing,
that's malpractice. Why is this person
getting a pass? That's terrible. I'm
sorry, I'm really upset about this.
>> [laughter]
>> I was upset about this.
Because you can't do this if you're a
journalist. The whole profession works
on an implied contract. Somebody grants
you the gift of their time and attention
and thoughts. They make themselves
vulnerable.
And in return, you pledge to respect
that vulnerability. You're not a
stenographer. You've entered for the
duration of the interview into an
intimate relationship. And intimate
relationships have rules.
But then, I went home after that
interview at the Y, after I had called
the reporter a villain and a disgrace to
our profession, and I realized
I don't even know who this person
[music] is.
And then I thought to myself,
oops.
Now I've made a mistake.
So I decided to track the reporter
[music] down.
That's after the break.
What do you remember about that
interview?
>> Well, it's funny you
you're asking this something that no
one's ever asked me. Um because I
remember that interview quite well for a
few reasons.
>> This is Carter Harris. He wrote the L
profile. He's now a screenwriter,
teaches at NYU, and one of the reasons
this article he wrote 25 years ago
sticks out is the reaction it got.
Particularly from J Lo and her manager
Benny Medina.
>> I actually remember being in a car with
Benny Medina in Los Angeles
and I can't remember why we were in a
car, but um
uh he was
telling me how disappointed J Lo was and
he was because it would seemed like a
negative interview. It wasn't negative
at all from my perspective.
>> At some point his profile of J-Lo
completely disappeared from the
internet.
And he always wondered if J-Lo and her
manager had something to do with it.
Was Gotti upset during the call?
Yes, he was, Harris remembers. He seemed
like he was in a state.
He mentioned something about having just
gotten off the phone with someone. He
thought Harris was a fashion writer and
Gotti seemed relieved to learn that
Harris had been an editor at The Source,
the magazine that was the bible of rap
at the time.
They talked about Puffy Combs and I'm
real and ain't it funny.
And then Gotti said that bit about J-Lo
not telling the truth. When you when you
heard it when you were interviewing him
and and decide to use what you were
using,
did you did you think that you might be
jeopardizing his relationship with J-Lo?
>> No.
And maybe that was naive of me, but what
I thought was
in the moment was wow,
that was honest.
She might be a little bit
irked, vexed
by one or two of the quotes.
Um
but I never imagined that it would
be such a big deal for her
or for him. I mean I
I I thought she'd be vexed. I mean when
you say, you know,
I gave her more hood credibility, that's
going to be like, come on, dude.
Um
or when you say uh
it was really about Diddy
and basically you're you're you're
accusing her of
not being honest, you know?
Yeah, that that I I totally
understand why she was vexed and I even
at the time I was like, oh, she might be
a little ticked off about this.
Um but I figured they'd
they'd air it out either publicly or
privately. That she'd be like, come on,
he overstepped on this one and then
maybe he comes back and says, "Yeah, all
right, I was on Molly." Which he was
willing to say back then.
>> Is it weird to hear someone say
25 years later
that the biggest mistake they made in
their life
was something they said to you in an
interview?
>> Oh, absolutely.
That made me feel very strange.
Um when I heard that, I was I was uh
I was
I I was very surprised and and very
I was a little disturbed, too, because I
that when I heard that, then I did have
feelings. Then I was like, "Oh, [__]
What did I do wrong?" You know, it's
like, "What
Was I responsible for this somehow?"
>> Did he run the quotes by Gotti and tell
him that it was too late, you said it?
No. That would have been the
fact-checker. That's the way things
worked in the magazine world of those
years.
>> If he had called me and said, "I was in
a state, "can you take those quotes
out?" Yeah, I probably would have worked
with him on that. Um but
I never got that call. Nobody ever asked
me about those quotes. So, you know,
what can I what can I really do? But
yeah, I I certainly felt weird about it.
I mean, I you know
Mhm.
I I I don't I I don't take any
any joy in in in being, you know, a part
of anyone's biggest regret.
>> Cotter was frank and thoughtful.
I liked him.
He was talking about a decision he made
many years ago when he was much [music]
younger.
And he said that he wouldn't necessarily
do the same thing today.
>> [music]
>> I understand that.
You have to make a certain number of
mistakes
to understand what a [music] mistake is.
>> It's really interesting cuz
if if I had been in the gym and somebody
had told me
this story and I was not [music]
the reporter and I was not Gotti, I
probably would have had the exact same
response. I'm I'm pretty sure I would
have been like, what? They said what?
They They messed with Gotti? Like
[music] and they screwed up a
relationship with J-Lo and Gotti? You
know, this is [__] This is like the
media, you know, they they do this,
especially L and these corporate
magazines and you know, all that. So So
I I'm not surprised [music] to hear that
that was your response. That probably
would have been my response.
Um
but
to the larger point,
um
I think we all do this in our own way in
lots of different contexts.
We jump to conclusions, mistaken
conclusions, and um
I certainly do in in my life and if I've
learned anything, it's that
I have to check myself sometimes and
say,
wait a minute. I'm I'm human like
everybody else. I'm jumping to a
conclusion.
I should go look and see if there's more
to this story.
Doesn't necessarily mean my conclusion
that I wanted to jump to is wrong. Could
be right. Could be worse than I thought
it was. Um
but I I do think
that that's the thing to take from this
is like,
hey everybody, each of us
can check ourselves, you know? We all
have the ability to check ourselves and
say, hey, maybe I should look into this
a little bit more.
>> We can all check ourselves a little bit
more.
On that, I have to agree.
Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Naddaff Hafery.
Our editor is Karen Shakerjian.
Fact checking by Angelyne Bacodo. Our
executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence.
Original music by Luis Guerra. [music]
Sound design and mastering by Marcello
Di Alavera.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
>> Coming [music] up on the next episode in
our mistakes series.
>> This is madness and um
Yeah, and and and and it was just jaw on
the floor. I I
I just never experienced anything like
that and
and I didn't see it coming.